SPLAT-1733: Update vSphere and include host/vm group (#1677)
openshift/enhancements: enhancements/installer/vsphere-ipi-zonal.md

	// +kubebuilder:validation:Pattern=`^/.*?/vm/.*?`
	// +optional
	Folder string `json:"folder,omitempty"`

> 	// template is the full inventory path of the virtual machine or template

Reviewer: If hosts are being used as zones, how will that information reflected in `Infrastructure` type?

Author: The infrastructure spec will have the name of the vm-host group of type hosts

We will not know the ESXi hosts directly that are in each zone. I don't think we should either since stretched clusters presumably should already have this defined.

Reviewer: But then, it sounds like customer must create a vm-host group for each host? I must be misunderstanding something. The CSI driver doesn't support hostgroup as a failure-domain fwiw.

Author: updated with https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/1677/commits/8c3f02c7a334d02dc5949dbde2dd9907259554d1

	// +optional
	Internal VSpherePlatformNodeNetworkingSpec `json:"internal"`
}
// VSpherePlatformSpec holds the desired state of the vSphere infrastructure provider.
// In the future the cloud provider operator, storage operator and machine operator will
// use these fields for configuration.
// +kubebuilder:validation:XValidation:rule="!has(oldSelf.apiServerInternalIPs) || has(self.apiServerInternalIPs)",message="apiServerInternalIPs list is required once set"
// +kubebuilder:validation:XValidation:rule="!has(oldSelf.ingressIPs) || has(self.ingressIPs)",message="ingressIPs list is required once set"
// +kubebuilder:validation:XValidation:rule="!has(oldSelf.vcenters) && has(self.vcenters) ? size(self.vcenters) < 2 : true",message="vcenters can have at most 1 item when configured post-install"
type VSpherePlatformSpec struct {
	// vcenters holds the connection details for services to communicate with vCenter.

> 	// Currently, only a single vCenter is supported, but in tech preview 3 vCenters are supported.

Reviewer: I thought one of the epics in 4.18 is to remove techpreview status from multi-vcenter support?

Author: I just copied and pasted what the current infra spec is as of 9/9 . afaik it is supposed to be ga'ed in 4.18 but maybe those updates have not been added yet. 

cc: @vr4manta

Reviewer 2: makes sense to merge the logic in an overall doc, but while in flux, I do see the complication of multi vcenter not being here as well.  Currently 4.17 it is feature gated.  Once its all finalized, should be GA.  Goal for GA is 4.18.

	// nodes. Each network is provided in the CIDR format and should be IPv4 or IPv6,
	// for example "10.0.0.0/8" or "fd00::/8".
	// +listType=atomic
	// +kubebuilder:validation:MaxItems=32
	// +kubebuilder:validation:XValidation:rule="self.all(x, self.exists_one(y, x == y))"
	// +optional
	MachineNetworks []CIDR `json:"machineNetworks"`
}
```

##### Updates required for vm-host group zonal

```golang

// The VSphereFailureDomainType is a string representation of a failure domain
// type. There are three supportable types: HostGroup, ComputeCluster and Datacenter
type VSphereFailureDomainType string

const (
	// HostGroupFailureDomain is a failure domain for a vCenter vm-host group.
	HostGroupFailureDomain VSphereFailureDomainType = "HostGroup"
	// ComputeClusterFailureDomain is a failure domain for a vCenter compute cluster.
	ComputeClusterFailureDomain VSphereFailureDomainType = "ComputeCluster"
	// DatacenterFailureDomain is a failure domain for a vCenter datacenter.
	DatacenterFailureDomain VSphereFailureDomainType = "Datacenter"
)

// VSpherePlatformFailureDomainSpec holds the region and zone failure domain and the vCenter topology of that failure domain.

> // +kubebuilder:validation:XValidation:rule="has(self.zoneType) && self.zoneType == 'HostGroup' ? self.topology.affinity.vmGroup != '' && self.topology.affinity.hostGroup != '' && self.topology.affinity.vmHostRule != '' : true",message="when zoneType is HostGroup, failuredomain topology affinity vmGroup, hostGroup and vmHostRule fields must be defined"

Reviewer 3: Topology does not appear in the spec here, I think it may have been meant to be there though?

This validation apppears that you want an optional struct, with required fields in for the zoneType, is this just a discriminated union? It would then have the standard that `hostGroup` is allowed if and only if `type == HostGroup`

```
region:
  type: ABC
zone:
  type: HostGroup
  hostGroup:
    vmGroup: ...
    hostGroup: ...
    vmHostRule: ...
```

Author: I broke out what is current (as of 9/9/24) and what is specifically changing for vm-host zonal. Would you rather have that as a single section?

Reviewer: personally - it makes sense to put new changes into existing structs, rather than breaking them out. This way, we can still see what changed via diff, but we can also see the full datatype if we view complete file.

Author: @JoelSpeed does this look like the direction you are thinking? https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/1677/commits/677ce07864da82e457922281634b05e5c7c20523

Author: or something like this: https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/1677/commits/fdb3dde5dc1d3ea6862c13e42e6e1a1339fbf67a

Since there is a name collision with region and zone, wondering if it should be moved to the topology struct

Reviewer 3: The latter of the two commits is where I was thinking to go

Author: _whew_ thats what I ended up with 

https://github.com/openshift/api/commit/906bb28eac2277d71a11c35dded4578db38f6598

The enhancement has been updated for that

https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/pull/1677/commits/ea2162a215491d563646fb7b59a638ebf66c5dc4

	// +openshift:validation:FeatureGateAwareEnum:featureGate=VSphereHostVMGroupZonal,enum=HostGroup;ComputeCluster
	// +optional
	ZoneType string `json:"zoneType,omitempty"`
}

// VSpherePlatformTopology holds the required and optional vCenter objects - datacenter,
// computeCluster, networks, datastore and resourcePool - to provision virtual machines.
type VSpherePlatformTopology struct {
	// affinity holds the VMGroup and the HostGroup names in vCenter corresponds to 
	// a vm-host group of type Virtual Machine and Host respectively. Is also
	// contains the VMHostRule which is an affinity vm-host rule in vCenter.
	// +openshift:validation:featureGate=VSphereHostVMGroupZonal
	// +kubebuilder:validation:Optional
	// +optional
	Affinity VSphereFailureDomainAffinity `json:"affinity,omitempty"`
}
 
// VSphereFailureDomainAffinity contains the vCenter cluster vm-host group (virtual machine and host types) 
// and the vm-host affinity rule that together creates a affinity configuration for vm-host based zonal. 
// This configuration within vCenter creates the required association between a failure domain, virtual machines
// and ESXi hosts to create a vm-host based zone.

> type VSphereFailureDomainAffinity struct {

Reviewer: So, the thing - we will have to see is, if a customer specifies `computeCluster` as region and then specifies two different `hostGroup` as zones and assuming those `hostGroups` don't share the datastore - will CSI driver work...

Author: that scenario was just asked in slack the other day so yeah should be a concern.

> 	// VMGroupName is the name of the vm-host group of type virtual machine within vCenter for this failure domain.

Reviewer 3: Should be `vmGroup` at the beginning of this godoc

	// This field is required when the VSphereFailureDomain ZoneType is HostGroup
	// +openshift:validation:featureGate=VSphereHostVMGroupZonal
	// +kubebuilder:validation:MaxLength=80
	// +optional

> 	VMGroup string `json:"vmGroup,omitempty"`

Reviewer: Will this be created if it doesn't exist already?

Author: the installer will create the vmGroup, one per failure domain

	// hostGroup is the name of the vm-host group of type host within vCenter for this failure domain.
	// This field is required when the VSphereFailureDomain ZoneType is HostGroup
	// +openshift:validation:featureGate=VSphereHostVMGroupZonal
	// +kubebuilder:validation:MaxLength=80
	// +optional

> 	HostGroup string `json:"hostGroup,omitempty"`

Reviewer: same as above.

Author: The installer will not create the hostGroup, that would be kinda hard since we would need to know each esxi host per zone.

	// valid values are thin, thick, and eagerZeroedThick. When not
	// specified, it will be set according to the default storage policy
	// of vsphere.
	DiskType DiskType `json:"diskType,omitempty"`
	// VCenters holds the connection details for services to communicate with vCenter.
	// Currently only a single vCenter is supported.
	// +kubebuilder:validation:Optional
	// +kubebuilder:validation:MaxItems=3
	// +kubebuilder:validation:MinItems=1
	VCenters []VCenter `json:"vcenters,omitempty"`
	// FailureDomains holds the VSpherePlatformFailureDomainSpec which contains
	// the definition of region, zone and the vCenter topology.
	// If this is omitted failure domains (regions and zones) will not be used.
	// +kubebuilder:validation:Optional
	FailureDomains []FailureDomain `json:"failureDomains,omitempty"`

	// LoadBalancer defines how the load balancer used by the cluster is configured.
	// LoadBalancer is available in TechPreview.
	// +optional
	LoadBalancer *configv1.VSpherePlatformLoadBalancer `json:"loadBalancer,omitempty"`
	// Hosts defines network configurations to be applied by the installer. Hosts is available in TechPreview.

> 	Hosts []*Host `json:"hosts,omitempty"`

Reviewer: Is this intended to support hosts as zones? What is the use case I wonder.

Author: Pretty sure the answer is yes, afaik it for static ip.

@vr4manta @rvanderp3 do you want to take that one?

Reviewer: But this is not reflected in `Infrastructure` type above. So information will be lost after cluster installation?

Reviewer: Also - I wonder why is this information here and not in `Topology` type..

Author: oh I think I misunderstood, `Hosts` is for OCP hosts and static ip, that isn't ESXi hosts.

	// +kubebuilder:validation:Pattern=`^/.*?/host/.*?/Resources.*`
	// +optional
	ResourcePool string `json:"resourcePool,omitempty"`
	// folder is the inventory path of the folder in which the
	// virtual machine is created/located.
	// +kubebuilder:validation:MinLength=1
	// +kubebuilder:validation:MaxLength=2048
	// +kubebuilder:validation:Pattern=`^/.*?/vm/.*?`
	// +optional
	Folder string `json:"folder,omitempty"`
	// template is the inventory path of the virtual machine or template
	// that will be used for cloning.
	// +kubebuilder:validation:MinLength=1
	// +kubebuilder:validation:MaxLength=2048
	// +kubebuilder:validation:Pattern=`^/.*?/vm/.*?`
	// +optional
	Template string `json:"template,omitempty"`
	// tagIDs is an optional set of tags to add to an instance. Specified tagIDs
	// must use URN-notation instead of display names. A maximum of 10 tag IDs may be specified.
	// +kubebuilder:example=`urn:vmomi:InventoryServiceTag:5736bf56-49f5-4667-b38c-b97e09dc9578:GLOBAL`
	// +optional

> 	TagIDs []string `json:"tagIDs,omitempty"`

Reviewer: How do we intend to use this?

Author: This was added in 4.16 I believe. It allows a compute machine to be tagged. I think it was specifically for backup processes that customers wanted it for.

	// +kubebuilder:validation:MinItems=1
	Datacenters []string `json:"datacenters"`
}

// Host defines host VMs to generate as part of the installation.
type Host struct {

> 	// FailureDomain refers to the name of a FailureDomain as described in https://github.com/openshift/enhancements/blob/master/enhancements/installer/vsphere-ipi-zonal.md

Reviewer 3: Probably want to explain this in more depth in situ rather than referring out to a doc

Author: @JoelSpeed first time updating a enhancement. This is what is current in the infra spec, so are you expecting this to be updated? I suppose that should really be a bug right?

Reviewer 3: Didn't realise this was the current state, we should probably look to update these where they are non-breaking, can you create a bug?

	// +optional
	FailureDomain string `json:"failureDomain"`
	// NetworkDeviceSpec to be applied to the host
	// +kubebuilder:validation:Required
	NetworkDevice *NetworkDeviceSpec `json:"networkDevice"`

> 	// Role defines the role of the node

Reviewer 3: Please expand the godoc here, what do each of these values mean and what effect does it have when I set them?

Author: Same as above, this is what is currrent.

	// +kubebuilder:validation:Enum="";bootstrap;control-plane;compute
	// +kubebuilder:validation:Required
	Role string `json:"role"`
}

// NetworkDeviceSpec defines network config for static IP assignment.
type NetworkDeviceSpec struct {
	// gateway is an IPv4 or IPv6 address which represents the subnet gateway,
	// for example, 192.168.1.1.

> 	// +kubebuilder:validation:Format=ipv4
> 	// +kubebuilder:validation:Format=ipv6

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
	// +kubebuilder:validation:XValidation:rule="isIP(self)",message="gateway must be a valid IPv4 or IPv6 address"
```

	Gateway string `json:"gateway,omitempty"`

	// ipAddrs is a list of one or more IPv4 and/or IPv6 addresses and CIDR to assign to

> 	// this device, for example, 192.168.1.100/24. IP addresses provided via ipAddrs are

Reviewer 3: Which device?

	// intended to allow explicit assignment of a machine's IP address.

> 	// +kubebuilder:validation:Format=ipv4
> 	// +kubebuilder:validation:Format=ipv6

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
	// +kubebuilder:validation:XValidation:rule="self.all(x, isCIDR(x))",message="..."
```

	// +kubebuilder:example=`192.168.1.100/24`
	// +kubebuilder:example=`2001:DB8:0000:0000:244:17FF:FEB6:D37D/64`
	// +kubebuilder:validation:Required

> 	IPAddrs []string `json:"ipAddrs"`

Reviewer 3: You'll have to define a maximal length for this

	// nameservers is a list of IPv4 and/or IPv6 addresses used as DNS nameservers, for example,
	// 8.8.8.8. a nameserver is not provided by a fulfilled IPAddressClaim. If DHCP is not the
	// source of IP addresses for this network device, nameservers should include a valid nameserver.

> 	// +kubebuilder:validation:Format=ipv4
> 	// +kubebuilder:validation:Format=ipv6

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
	// +kubebuilder:validation:XValidation:rule="isIP(self)",message="gateway must be a valid IPv4 or IPv6 address"
```

	// +kubebuilder:example=`8.8.8.8`

> 	Nameservers []string `json:"nameservers,omitempty"`

Reviewer 3: Should add a maximal length to this list as well

// type. There are three supportable types: HostGroup, ComputeCluster and Datacenter
type VSphereFailureDomainType string

const (
	// HostGroupFailureDomain is a failure domain for a vCenter vm-host group.
	HostGroupFailureDomain FailureDomainType = "HostGroup"
	// ComputeClusterFailureDomain is a failure domain for a vCenter compute cluster.
	ComputeClusterFailureDomain FailureDomainType = "ComputeCluster"
	// DatacenterFailureDomain is a failure domain for a vCenter datacenter.
	DatacenterFailureDomain FailureDomainType = "Datacenter"
)

type FailureDomain struct {
	// regionType defines the type of region that is used for this failure domain. The current available options
	// are "ComputeCluster" and "HostGroup"
	// +kubebuilder:validation:Enum=Datacenter;ComputeCluster
	// +optional
	RegionType FailureDomainType `json:"regionType,omitempty"`
	// zoneType defines the type of zone that is used for this failure domain. The current available options
	// are HostGroup and ComputeCluster.
	// +kubebuilder:validation:Enum=ComputeCluster;HostGroup
	// +optional
	ZoneType FailureDomainType `json:"zoneType,omitempty"`
}

> type Topology struct {

Reviewer 3: Where is this struct included?

Author: Similar to the infra spec changes, just showing snipits of what would actually change. The current topology struct is above.
